Outputs and Reports
===================

Running ``fastmda`` (CLI or API) produces a predictable tree of directories so
results can be shared, validated, or re-used in downstream pipelines. This page
summarises the most common locations and how they relate to helper scripts.

Per-analysis folders
--------------------

Each analysis (``rmsd``, ``sasa``, ``cluster``, etc.) writes to a folder named
``<analysis>_output`` unless ``--output`` or ``output=`` overrides it. Inside you
will typically find:

``*.dat``
    Tabular data (time series, per-residue values, embeddings).

``*.png``
    Publication-ready figures produced via ``apply_slide_style`` (see
    :doc:`usage/plotting`).

``<command>.log``
    Timestamped log capturing CLI arguments / API parameters, library versions,
    and warnings.

``*_stats.dat`` (time-series only)
    Summary mean/standard deviation files produced when ``compute_stat=True``
    (API) or ``fastmda analyze --compute-stat`` (CLI). These are emitted for
    RMSD, RMSF, Rg, total SASA, and Q-value analyses. Corresponding plots include
    a dashed mean line and a shaded ±1σ band.

The ``fastmda analyze`` orchestrator defaults to ``analyze_output/`` but may
spawn secondary directories for certain analyses (e.g., ``cluster/``,
``dimred/``) mirroring the structure under ``analyze_output/`` in the repo.

Aggregate reports
-----------------

``analyze_output/``
    Example output from the orchestrator, tracking combined runs of all analyses.

``analyze_measure_output/``
    Artifacts produced by the measurement scripts under ``analyze_measure_output``
    (see ``scripts/`` for automation helpers). These capture benchmarking runs
    with different cluster/dimred settings.

``validator_outputs/``
    Data and figures generated by validation utilities (typically run in CI).

``slides/``
    Sample PowerPoint decks produced when ``--slides`` or ``slides=True`` is
    specified. Filenames follow ``fastmda_slides_<ddmmyy.HHMM>.pptx`` unless an
    explicit path is provided.

``test_output/``
    Regression artifacts emitted by certain pytest suites. Handy when debugging
    plotting-related failures locally.

Helper scripts
--------------

The ``scripts/`` directory contains utilities that read/write the folders above,
including automation for measurement campaigns and documentation figures. Refer
to script docstrings and comments for invocation hints. The ``examples/`` folder
provides end-to-end notebooks and command snippets that assume the same output
layout.

Cleaning up
-----------

Most directories can be safely deleted between experiments. The tests recreate
what they need, and CLI/API commands will repopulate outputs based on the next
run. If you are running repeated benchmarks, consider pointing ``--output`` to a
fresh directory each time to keep versions separate.
